---
title: Why September Not May 1st
date: 2021-04-30T04:00:00+00:00
type: blog
author: Matthew Bartell
hero: "/images/jj-ying-7JX0-bfiuxQ-unsplash.jpg"

---
Around the world, a Labour day is celebrated for the commemoration of laborers and the working class rights to an eight-hour workday stemming from likes of the Haymarket riots. The day has many names such as International Workers’ Day, May Day, and many others. The holiday was originally on May 1st to pay tribute to the labor movement that significantly revolutionized the workplace. With the Haymarket affair having occurred on May 4th, 1886, a term called Mayday became synonymous with the event. Officially declared in 1904 by the Sixth Conference of the Second International, the conference urged, “all Social Democratic Party organizations and trade unions of all countries to demonstrate energetically on the First of May for the legal establishment of the eight-hour day, for the class demands of the proletariat, and for universal peace.” As the coordinated Strike was planned for May 1st, the commemoration was logically thought to be on the same day.

May 1st may have been celebrated around the world yet in the United States, trouble concerning the nature of the Haymarket affair began to raise problems. Labour day was never actually on May 1st in the United States. Since the riots were somewhat violent in the U.S., glancing back to a bombing, President Grover Cleveland did not want to associate the emerging holiday with a politically charged violent event. Socialist and anarchist movements backed May 1st as the official date of Labour Day, and the United States could not associate themselves with the radical groups. The U.S. holiday was going to be very different from the rest of the world. Instead of commemorating a tragic event, the Americans’ social and economic success was celebrated. President Cleveland instead came to publicly support a September Labor Day to cause less unrest among the people of his country. By June 28, 1894. The President had signed the new date into law.

By the 20th century, most countries had adopted Labour day in memory of the Haymarket riots as May 1st including at the time, the Soviet Union. The Cold War was starting to take flight between the two countries and the United States had to further their history from the USSR. A celebration was held in every town and city held under Marxist-Leninist rule including more popular places like the Red Square. The parades were also accommodated with huge military displays and soldiers to greet the masses under their regime. With the Soviet soldier parading through the majority of towns and Moscow’s Red Square on May 1st, the U.S. began to grow uneasy having their past associated with communism. The events of Chicago were put in a forgotten corner with no intention of ever letting them out. The nervous Americans were quick to rebrand their May 1st as other holidays such as Law Day and Americanization Day.

With May Day being a focal point for major demonstrations by many communist and various radical groups throughout the years, North America tried to distance itself the best it could. The first Monday of September, Labour Day, has been established the day the U.S. comes together to celebrate its progressive worker rights and success and to remember the people who made it happen.
