+++
author = "Arianna Bird"
date = 2021-04-27T04:00:00Z
hero = "/images/1000x-1.jpeg"
title = "Workers During the 1880s Versus Today"
type = "blog"

+++
During the early 1800s, factories and machine use became popular in America. Workers during this time were just starting to experience the change from working with their hands, to working side by side with machinery. The machinery used started to expand after the industrialization movement. The industrial revolution spanned. People in the 1880s were now fairly used to this new machinery and booming economic needs. Workers developed a relationship with the use of machines and difficult working conditions. Because machines were so fast powered, the demand for materials went up thus making the demand for human labour rise. With faster machines being invented, employees had to catch up. They were forced to work in dingy factories, given little breaks, and were neglected by their bosses (_United States history - the struggles of labor_). Workers had little say in their conditions. If people during this time wanted a job, they needed to deal with their work environment. Typical work days were twelve hours long and people worked for six days a week. The employees would spend their entire days in a noisy, dirty environment only barely scraping by…

This treatment was accepted by many, but the ones that rose up against it have gone down in history. The Haymarket riots created a backlash of attack from workers. The workers strike started off as a peaceful protest for better working conditions. They simply wanted to decrease the typical work day. Being able to work eight hours rather than twelve (Smithsonian 1966) would’ve helped workers a great deal in life. Four extra hours in the day could’ve been spent with family, friends, or simply relaxing after six day work weeks.

The maltreatment that occurred during the 1880s vastly differs from the working conditions of today's citizens. Changing from a time of industrialization to a time of technological advances and convenience work, employees now have much more privileges and authority throughout their jobs. Because of the Haymarket riots, working conditions have turned from unbearable to now acceptable. Workers are no longer considered as just “workers”. They are part of the company and now have the term “employee”. Before, people had little say in their conditions and now if there's an issue, it's encouraged to talk with management about it. We’ve set up positions like “HR” to protect employees and give the fairest treatments possible.

Americans have vast opportunities for employment all over the states. We are able to apply for any positions we want, and are not limited to simply working in factories or in coal mines. The main differences, however, that we experience now regarding work versus during the 1880s is the type of work we apply for. Back during the 19th century, people were needed in factories (_'You dirty Boy!', 1800s_ 2018). The main jobs during this time revolved around manual labor and grind. Nowadays, we’re most likely to see a demand for fast food workers and the service industry. Low impact jobs are high since we don’t have the same needs in society for as much manual labor. America has changed since the time of workers riots and strikes. Workers are now in control of their employment and are protected from being overworked and misused.

### Works Cited

1. Smithsonian. (1966). The haymarket riot. Retrieved May 02, 2021, from [https://americanhistory.si.edu/collections/search/object/nmah_1050841](https://americanhistory.si.edu/collections/search/object/nmah_1050841 "https://americanhistory.si.edu/collections/search/object/nmah_1050841")
2. United States history - the struggles of labor. (n.d.). Retrieved May 02, 2021, from [http://countrystudies.us/united-states/history-82.htm](http://countrystudies.us/united-states/history-82.htm "http://countrystudies.us/united-states/history-82.htm")
3. 'You dirty Boy!', 1800s. (2018). _The Pharmaceutical Journal_. doi:10.1211/pj.2018.20205338